rdhs blog piece preview checks (#413)
ropensci/roweb2: content/blog/2019-01-29-rdhs.md

To begin with I thought it best to describe what problem `rdhs` tries to solve, 
why it was developed and how I came to be involved in this project. I then give a
really brief overview of what the package can do, before continuing to 
describe how writing my first proper package and the rOpenSci 
review process was. Lastly I wanted to share a couple of things that I learnt along 
the way. These are not very clever or difficult things, 
but rather things that were difficult to Google, which now I think about it should probably
be the best metric for a difficult problem. 

### Motivation

#### What is the DHS Program

The [Demographic and Health Survey (DHS) Program](https://www.dhsprogram.com) 
has collected and disseminated population survey data from 
over 90 countries for over 30 years. This amounts to over 400 
surveys that give representative data on health indicators, which in
many countries provides the key data that mark progress towards targets such as 
the [Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs)](https://sustainabledevelopment.un.org/sdgs). In addition,
DHS survey data has been used to inform health policy such as detailing trends in child mortality[^1] 

> and characterising the distribution of malaria control interventions in Africa in order to map the 

Reviewer: You have used "Malaria" and "malaria". Check whole doc for consistency (maybe capitalization is warranted sometimes but if so, that's not clear)

Author: changed to lower case throughout

a curated data set created from survey data from multiple surveys. These steps 
involve:

1. Accessing standard survey indicators through the [DHS API](https://api.dhsprogram.com/). 
1. Using the API to identifying the surveys and datasets relevant to your particular analysis, i.e.
the ones that ask questions related to your topic of interest.
1. Downloading survey datasets from the [DHS website](https://dhsprogram.com/data/available-datasets.cfm).
1. Loading the datasets and associated metadata into R.
1. Extracting variables and combining datasets for pooled multi-survey analyses.

We will quickly cover these 5 main steps, with the first 2 showing how `rdhs` functions
as an API client and the last 3 points showing how `rdhs` can be used to download
raw data sets from the DHS website. Before we have a look at these, let's first load `rdhs`:

```r
library(rdhs)
```

### API

#### 1. Access standard indicator data via the API

The DHS program has published an API that gives access to 12
different data sets. Each API endpoint represents one of the 12 data sets 
(e.g. https://api.dhsprogram.com/rest/dhs/tags), and can be accessed using the `dhs_<>()` functions. For 

> more information about this    

Author: fixed

decreased after RDTs were introduced (assumed 2010). 

```r
# Make an api request
resp <- dhs_data(indicatorIds = "ML_FEVT_C_AML", surveyYearStart = 2010,breakdown = "subnational")

# filter it to 12 countries for space
countries  <- c("Angola","Ghana","Kenya","Liberia",
                "Madagascar","Mali","Malawi","Nigeria",
                "Rwanda","Sierra Leone","Senegal","Tanzania")

# and plot the results
library(ggplot2)
ggplot(resp[resp$CountryName %in% countries,],
       aes(x=SurveyYear,y=Value,colour=CountryName)) +
  geom_point() +
  geom_smooth(method = "glm") + 
  theme(axis.text.x = element_text(angle = 90, vjust = .5)) +
  ylab(resp$Indicator[1]) + 
  facet_wrap(~CountryName,ncol = 6) 
```

![](/img/blog-images/2019-01-29-rdhs/plot.png)

#### 2. Identify surveys relevant for further analysis

You may, however, wish to do more nuanced analysis than the API allows. 
The following 4 sections detail a very basic example of how to quickly 
identify, download and extract datasets you are interested in.  

Let's say we want to get all DHS survey data from the Democratic Republic of 
Congo and Tanzania in the last 5 years (since 2013), which covers the use of 

> rapid diagnostic tests (RDTs) for malaria. To begin we'll interact with the 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
rapid diagnostic tests for malaria ("RDT" below). To begin we'll interact with the 
```
modify abbreviation text

DHS API to identify our datasets.

```r
## make a call with no arguments
sc <- dhs_survey_characteristics()
sc[grepl("Malaria", sc$SurveyCharacteristicName), ]
```

```
##    SurveyCharacteristicID SurveyCharacteristicName
## 57                     96            Malaria - DBS
## 58                     90     Malaria - Microscopy
## 59                     89            Malaria - RDT
## 60                     57          Malaria module 
## 61                      8 Malaria/bednet questions
```

There are 87 different survey characteristics, with one specific survey 

> characteristic for Malaria RDTs. In this example we will use this to find the surveys 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
characteristic for Malaria rapid diagnostic tests (RDT). In this example we will use this to find the surveys 
```
add full text for abbrev

which will create a list with each dataset and its extracted data as a `data.frame`. 

```r
# extract the data and add geographic information too
extract <- extract_dhs(questions, add_geo = FALSE)
```

The resultant extract is a list, with a new element for each different dataset 
that you have extracted. We can now combine our two data frames for further analysis using the `rdhs` package 
function `rbind_labelled()`:

```r
# first let's bind our first extraction, without the hv024
extract_bound <- rbind_labelled(extract)
```

```
## Warning in rbind_labelled(extract): Some variables have non-matching value labels: hv024.
## Inheriting labels from first data frame with labels.
```

The thrown warning has shown us that *hv024* did not have matching labels between 
the two lists, and the labels from the first list have been used. 
*hv024* stores the regions for these 2 countries, and we probably want to keep all 
the labels, which we can do by using the `labels` argument:

```r
# lets try concatenating the hv024
better_bound <- rbind_labelled(extract, labels = list("hv024"="concatenate"))
```
We could also specify new labels for a variable. For example, imagine the two 

> datasets encoded their RDT responses differently, with the first one as 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
datasets encoded their rapid diagnostic test responses differently, with the first one as 
```
spell out RDT

`c("No","Yes")` and the other as `c("Negative","Positive")`. We can choose to
relabel these, e.g. as `c("NegativeTest","PositiveTest")`:

```r
# lets try concatenating the hv024 and providing new labels
better_bound <- rbind_labelled(
  extract,
  labels = list("hv024"="concatenate",
                "hml35"=c("NegativeTest"=0, "PositiveTest"=1))
)

# and our new label
head(attr(better_bound$hml35,"labels"))
```

```
## NegativeTest PositiveTest 
##            0            1
```

For more information about controlling how to extract data from your downloaded
sections, see the [last section in the introduction vignette](https://ropensci.github.io/rdhs/articles/introduction.html#extract-variables-and-combining-datasets-for-pooled-multi-survey-analyses-). 

---

> We now have managed to go from our initial request for data about the use of 

Reviewer: Can you add 1-2 sentences saying more specifically what you now have in the "a finalised data set" after these 5 steps? The plot in step 1 lures the reader with a really interesting research question, but after focusing on the technical steps, it's hard to know what we end up with. 

For the record, I'm realizing this is one of the most common things I see in draft blog posts about packages.

Author: I've added a bit more here and have tried to reframe the end of the package overview, to try and remind the reader why we are interested in building these data sets in the first place. Thanks for picking this up.

Reviewer: this is great thanks

> rapid diagnostic tests (RDTs) for malaria to a finalised data set that

Reviewer: ```suggestion
rapid diagnostic tests for malaria to a finalised data set that
```
remove abbrev

highlight for me was actually having the opportunity to work
on a code base with someone else in a collaborative way. I work in a large collaborative
group, however, this has not translated as much to working on the same set of code
with someone. As a result I've never had to properly learn how to use git outside of 
`clone`, `commit` and `push`, nor had I made use of much of the useful aspects of GitHub. So learning
how to correctly use branches in git and realising that helpful comments are actually
helpful (eventually) was really great. With this in mind I wanted to thank [Jeff Eaton](https://twitter.com/eatonjw)
again for taking on this project. He definitely helped drive it over the finish line, 
and it was nice to have a glimpse at what working as a developer would look like if 
I decide to leave pure academia. 

There were also a few things that before I started writing `rdhs`
I knew I would have to figure out but I didn't have a clue where to start, and for
which repeated googling didn't eventually help with. Fortunately, I work in the 
same department as [Rich FitzJohn](https://twitter.com/rgfitzjohn), 

> so it was great having someone to point me in the right direction. The following, 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
so it was great having someone to point me in the right direction. The following 
```
omit comma after "following"
